##1. Introduction
My main interest in the study of language lies with linguistic diversity and variation, be it variation across languages or within one single language. I pursued this line in my typological studies of the languages of the world, in my intra-genealogical comparative research on the languages of Daghestan, and in my investigations of the variability and diachronic evolution of linguistic structures within specific languages and across their dialects. In my view, while variation within a system is indicative of social mechanisms governing the use of a language by members of the same speech community, variation across systems is indicative of the functional mechanisms that constrain the limits of human communication. While this combination of variationist and typological focus in one researcher is probably not extremely common in the field of linguistics, I believe that linguistic differences are more informative than similarities, and should be a starting point in any approach to the study of language.\


##2. Research
###2.1. Linguistic typology
My research in the domain of language typology started in 1996 with a publication based on my BA thesis that was co-authored with Vladimir Plungian and presented the concept of contextual redundancy in grammar (Plungian and Daniel, 1996). The idea was that the same grammatical category may show cross-linguistic variation in terms of the obligatoriness or even admissibility of its overt expression in contexts where the grammatical meaning is also expressed by lexical means, such as use of number on nouns with a numeral modifier or use of the definite article with proper names. Ever since, my study of linguistic typology has been linked to diversity in the domain of morphology, morphosyntax and semantics of grammar.\ 
In the following few years, I worked exclusively on the topic of my PhD, associative plurals (the meaning ‘X and his/her group’), which resulted in several minor publications (Daniel 1998, Daniel 1999, Daniel and Merdanova 2001, Daniel 2002b) and in my defense in 2000 (best typological PhD award from the Association for Linguistic Typology in 2001) and led to my first important typological publications (Daniel and Moravcsik 2005/2013, Daniel 2005/2013, Daniel 2005), now often quoted (respectively 161, 62 and 52 quotations according to google scholar) in both functional and formal literature and all dedicated to the distinction between homogeneous and non-homogeneous plurals, the latter prominently including associative plurals and pronominal plurals. At present, I am regularly contacted as a reviewer for journal articles on the topic.\ 
My second main field of expertise is the typology of case functions. I had the chance to start my empirical study of language with East Caucasian (Nakh-Daghestanian) languages (see Fig. 1 and 2), whose signature property is the extreme affluence of nominal inflection. I have been working on both spatial and syntactic functions of the category of case, and over the years have come to the conclusion that the limits between the two domains of nominal inflection are not clear-cut not only in the diachronic dimension (with spatial meanings developing into argument functions) but even synchronically and even in languages like East Caucasian, where spatial inflection seems to be formally distinguishable from syntactic function by its complex (bimorphemic) structure (see Kibrik 1970, Comrie and Polinsky 1998, Daniel and Ganenkov 2009). As one example, as also explained in my research proposal, spatial functions are often conceptually very close to non-spatial semantic roles (Recipient, Addressee of Speech). Another line of my research on the category of case was related to the typology and functions of the vocative (Spencer and Daniel 2009, Daniel 2009), often argued not to be a case at all, a claim that I strongly oppose (Daniel 2016). I argue that the category of case cannot be uncontroversially defined on purely functional grounds (such as bound dependent marking on nouns, see Primus 2011) but must be based on the idea of paradigmatic alignment of functions into one inflectional category, which makes the function of address eligible for casehood depending on the makeup of the nominal inflection system (i.e. a case in Latin, but not in English where this function is expressed by particles or vocative intonation).\
A natural evolution of my interest towards the grammar of case also led me to study lexical valency and its alternations. While this research was much more limited in terms of its empirical scope (Daniel, Maisak and Merdanova 2012, Daniel and Khurshudian 2015), it significantly advanced my understanding of the cross-linguistic variability of argument realization in the sense of Levin and Rappoport-Hovav (2005) and led to some conference papers and articles (Daniel et al. 2010). More generally, my research has taught me how to draw lessons from the languages of my expertise so that they also apply cross-linguistically or at least question general typological assumptions. For instance, a study of variation of encoding of the role of Addressee with verbs of speech as Goals in East Caucasian in Daniel (2014) casts a reasonable doubt on the assumption - so widespread that it is often not even spelled-out - that the dative encoding of this role is due to the metaphor of transfer of information. At least as an alternative, this function of the dative may go back to the historical (or, often, still present) spatial function of the same marker.\  
I also learned that the apparent diversity of language structures is probably more superficial than it may seem to us typologists, and, however fascinated we are by this diversity, one always needs to suspect that extremely variable formal arrangements are covering underlying similarities of functions. As just one example, after a closer look at the peculiar bimorphemic structure of the East Caucasian nominal inflection (I refer again to the overview of the evidence and relevant literature in Daniel and Ganenkov 2009) the expression of the category of directionality in some of these languages turns out to be less bound than previously believed, which makes the morphological makeup more similar to the complex spatial adpositions known from Standard Average European. I emphasize that, unlike in the formal paradigm of linguistic analysis, I believe that superficial formal differences are hiding deeper functional, not structural similarities.\  


###2.2. Empirical expertise, fieldwork and East Caucasian languages
From my first year as a university student, I was taking part in team fieldwork on various language families of Russia, including Uralic (Khanty, Veps, Nganasan), Turkic (Chuvash, Tatar) and Chukotkan (Alutor). Almost all of these projects were important for widening my typological vision, and some resulted in conference talks or publications, including nominal tense and three-participant events in Nganasan, differential object marking in Chuvash, flexibility of plural interpretation in Tatar, and hierarchical alignment in Alutor (Daniel  2007, Volkov et al. 2012, Volkov and Daniel 2017).\ 
But my true empirical and field expertise lies with the languages of Daghestan. I first went there in 1989 and then again every year from 1997 on. I have started as a member of Alexander Kibrik’s field team, where I learned the basics of field work and of the grammar and phonetics of East Caucasian languages. Ever since, my main line of research has been a typologically informed analysis of the languages of the family which, in its turn, has enriched my typological expertise.\
From 2000 onwards, including from 2010 as a member of the project on traditional multilingualism in Daghestan (multidagestan.com), I have visited dozens of villages and collected lexical and acoustic data in many languages from almost all branches of the family. I have done more extensive documentation work on Bagvalal (Daniel 2001) and Tukita (Magomedgadžieva and Daniel 2021) in the Andic branch, Mehweb (Daniel et al. 2019, Musaev and Daniel 2021) in the Dargwa branch, Archi and Rutul in the Lezgic branch, and Khinalug (a family level isolate).\
My work on East Caucasian has always been two-fold. On the one hand, I have been involved in the documentation of the languages and multilingual practices of the speech communities, which led to the compilation of various resources as described in Section 3. On the other hand, I have always conceived my work on these languages in such a way that it would contribute to the study of human language in general, be it in a morphosyntactic, phonetic or sociolinguistic dimension. As a result, the research questions that my colleagues and I were approaching were rarely limited to the family but more often derived from - and had an impact on my understanding of - cross-linguistic variation, ditransitive constructions in Daniel et al. 2010, including relativization in Lander and Daniel 2013, encoding of the Addressee of Speech in Daniel 2014, logophoricity in discourse in Daniel 2015, morphosyntactic status of property words in Daniel 2018, transitivity in Daniel 2022, apprehensives in Daniel and Dobrushina, under revision, a).\                  


###2.3. Multilingualism and language contact in Daghestan
The area where East Caucasian languages are spoken represent an interesting even if not unique configuration of a compact region where about 50 languages are spoken that show both deep divergence and strong structural alignment, with less grammatical influence from the outside. As a result, these languages manifest multiple cross-linguistically rare phenomena which are difficult to group into those that are due to inheritance vs. those that are due to feature spread. To answer this type of questions, we need a robust knowledge of local networks of traditional multilingualism which provided the basis for structural alignment. At the same time, these networks are quickly vanishing, so that documenting traditional multilingualism becomes a not less urgent task than documenting the languages themselves, especially because the languages are more persistent, as compared to small-scale multilingualism which is more endangered.\
Together with Nina Dobrushina, from 2010 and until now I have been involved in the systematic documentation and analysis of the sociolinguistic landscape of Daghestan in terms of multilingual patterns. Some results of this have been presented in (Dobrushina et al. 2020, 2021). Until very recently, one pending and worrisome question was the reliability of the data that we are using in these studies. This is due to the method that has been suggested in (Dobrushina 2013): our consultants report not only their own inventories but also those of their deceased parents. In sociology, this is called recall data, and it is not immediately clear whether the data obtained indirectly (about the consultant’s relatives) can be trusted to the same extent as the direct data (about the consultant herself). In Daniel et al. (2022), an analysis based on a novel application of machine learning methods, we have shown that indirect data are reasonably similar to direct data, so this shade of doubt has finally dissolved.\     
From 2017 onwards, documenting moribund multilingual patterns has been complemented by the systematic collection of lexical data in an attempt to “probe for lexical contact”, which led to two important publications (Daniel et al. 2021, Chechuro et al. 2021). The first study, published in Language, argues that lingua francas have a special status in speakers’ multilingual inventories, more readily serving as lexical donors than languages available as part of vicinal multilingualism (command of languages of the immediate neighbors), and is an important development of, and contribution to, recent thinking about traditional multilingualism in linguistically dense landscapes (Epps 2018, Vaughan 2019).\ 
\

###2.4. Linguistic variation
Finally, an important line of research I have been following was linguistic variation and methods of its study and assessment. In 2015, together with Nina Dobrushina (currently University of Tübingen), Ruprecht von Waldenfels (Jena University) and Aleksandra Ter-Avanesova (Institute of Russian Language, Moscow) we launched a field project that led to the creation of the Ustja River Basin Corpus (see more in Section 3 on this resource). Based on these vast and rich data, we were able to detect and study linguistic variation in a small speech community in Northern Russia caught between the local dialect and standard Russian, and to conduct a comparative analysis of this variation across variables and speaker age (Daniel et al. 2019) as well as their sex. On the methodological level, we showed how logistic regression models can be used with corpus data not only to detect a clear correlation of dialect loss with year of birth but also to compare the rate of change across variables. We defined three parameters to model differences in the dynamics of change: initial level of dialectal realization of our oldest speakers, steepness of change, and turning point where speakers tend to show equal probability of using either the dialect or the standard variant. We showed how these parameters can be used to compare variables in a principled and informative way. We also noted that, in the case of some variables, users completely shift to the standard variant, while in the case of others the dialectal variant survives, even if marginally, a difference that is not captured by the logistic regression model and probably associated with their different levels of emblematicity (societal awareness of the variation).\     
In a different vein, Ter-Avanesova and Daniel (2022) is a cross-dialect study of the competition between two variants of the Russian genitive, the standard genitive and the so-called second “partitive” genitive. Because the dialectal corpora other than Ustja are too small and often lack the necessary metadata, the available data are  insufficient to carry out a true variationist study. Instead, by comparing the frequency and the use of the partitive genitive in corpora of several distinct dialects, we show that the use of the second genitive in its different functions does not correlate with the more or less “northwestern” location of the dialect. We have thus been able to cast doubts on its areal connection to the Circumbaltic partitive category (see the discussion of the contact hypothesis of the origins of the Russian partitive genitive in Koptjevskaja-Tamm and Waelchli 2001, Seržant 2015). This study continues my previous corpus-based research on linguistic factors of variation between two types of genitive in Standard Russian (Daniel 2014), and is similar in its approach to the corpus study of variation between two realizations of the Russian third person pronoun (e.g. im vs. nim ‘he (Instr)’) in Daniel (2015), which is also being continued in research carried out together with one of my former students.\
Together with Nina Dobrushina, we are currently working on an overview paper on linguistic variation in Russian for the Routledge Handbook of Variational Sociolinguistics edited by Paul Kerswill, Alexandra D’Arcy and Yoshiyuki Asahi.\
If Russian is a language relatively understudied in variationist terms, minority languages are much more so (but see Stanford and Preston 2008, Dorian 2010, Hildebrandt, Jany and Silva 2017 as exceptions). In a paper written together with Vasilisa Andriyanets (Moscow) and Brigitte Pakendorf (DDL), we consider how variation within a dialect can be distinguished from variation between dialects (Andriyanets et al. 2018).\ 
In an ongoing project based on the data collected in Mehweb, an unwritten language of the Dargwa branch of East Caucasian, we consider the behavior of several phonological and morphophonological variables; among other things, our preliminary results suggest that female speakers “lead the change”, i.e. are more consistent users of the innovative variants at least of some of the variables. While this clearly supports conclusions from most previous studies of variation, the result is far from trivial, because the overwhelming majority of these studies have been using the data from industrial and post-industrial communities and are not necessarily scalable down to speech communities speaking unwritten minority languages.\     


###2.5. Acoustic phonetics
East Caucasian languages are known for the complexity of their consonantal inventories, especially in the use of glottalization and pharyngealization. My long field experience with these languages naturally evolved into documenting and analyzing this aspect of their structure, and finally led to a number of recent publications and joint projects. In Shiryaev et al. (2022), we analyze the acoustic properties of a glottalized sonorant in Rikvani Andi, a cross-linguistically rare sound type that has not been so far acoustically documented in the Caucasus anywhere except in this lect. We were able to contextualize the study from a typological perspective, so that the paper has been published in one of the leading journals of the field, Phonetica. As a secondary contributor, I also participated in another high-profile publication, Arkhipov et al. (2019), a project of the study of pharyngeal contrasts. This project is now being continued with a focus on the data of the language of my expertise, Mehweb. Together with Prof. Sven Grawunder (Halle) I am working on a study of the realization of ejective consonants that aims at showing that within one family the acoustic implementation of the same phonological feature may be substantially different and follows the same dimensions of variation as the variation across genealogically and areally unrelated languages.\    
##3. Online resources
A major resource I participated in is the Eastern Armenian National Corpus (eanc.net), a vast (over 100 million tokens) resource on Modern Eastern Armenian that also includes a large (several million tokens) collection of transcriptions of spoken discourse. This is one of the biggest corpora of a language of this size and is intended for both non-professional users and researchers. I was also one of the PIs in the project of creating the Ustja River Basin Corpus, an open online resource providing access to dozens of hours of transcription of the speakers of a Russian dialect of the Arkhangelsk group of dialects, spoken in an agglomeration of several small villages in the north of Russia. With over 1 million tokens, the corpus is probably the biggest dialectal resource for such a focused location, and certainly the biggest online resource for a Russian dialect. As to the minority languages of Daghestan, small corpora of Archi and Khinalug are available online (http://www.philol.msu.ru/~languedoc/eng/archives/texts.php), and more corpus data are being produced.\ 
From 2016, I have been involved in creating several other online resources based on my fieldwork in Daghestan. These resources are mostly lexical in nature, including dictionaries of Mehweb (https://linghub.ru/mehwebdict/) and Tukita (http://lingconlab.ru/TukitaDict/), and other similar lexical collections are in preparation for Akhvakh, Karata, Kubachi and Tsakhur, all of which I collected together with language consultants and all of which are based on a fixed list of about 1,000 concepts, suggested by Diana Forker and Oleg Belyaev (University of Jena) and designed so as to make lexical studies of the languages of Daghestan lexically comparable.\ 
A less conventional, more innovative idea lies behind DagLoans, a database on lexical borrowing in Daghestan (Chechuro et al. 2019 - http://lingconlab.ru/dagloans/). The idea behind the database is that of ‘probing’ for lexical borrowing, i.e. collecting a small fixed list of concepts from different languages and checking them for borrowed / non-borrowed status , so as to make the borrowing rates comparable across specific donor-recipient pairs (see also Haspelmath and Tadmor  (2009) for a similar world-wide project, which served as our inspiration). A quantitative analysis of these data made it possible to publish two high-profile papers, showing this novel method is sensitive enough not only to detect important differences between several donor languages (Daniel et al. 2021) but also between different donor dialects (Chechuro et al. 2021) and thus provides a high-precision tool to reconstruct the history of multilingualism and language contact.\
Another resource with a novel rationale is (http://lingconlab.ru/dagswadesh/), a database of Swadesh lists collected on a village basis. The idea is that lexical data often comes at a ‘language’ rather than ‘speech community’ level, so that lexical divergence in such a linguistically dense area as Daghestan may go unnoticed or at best remain qualitative. This is especially important in the case of East Caucasian languages, where the notion of language vs. dialect is often socially and emotionally loaded. Controlling lexical data for the village provenance, and providing for a dense coverage of villages, will make claims about linguistic divergence between dialects more verifiable. So far we have data for the languages of the Andic branch and for the dialects of Rutul. Data from the database has been used in Koile et al. (2022), which allowed us to confirm a geographic bias in traditional historical comparative analysis (researchers tend to expect the varieties that are geographically closer to be more similar than they are). Together with Konstantin Filatov, we are currently working on an improved tree for the Andic branch.\  
Finally, inspired by my experience of working for the World Atlas of Language Structures, I have initiated - and continue to be one of the PIs of - the Typological Atlas of Daghestan (Daniel et al. 2022, see http://lingconlab.ru/dagatlas/), a project of visual representation of the linguistic diversity of the languages of Daghestan. Apart from other things, this project also involves students in the study of East Caucasian languages and instills an early interest in linguistic diversity.\     


##References

Andriyanets, Vasilisa, Michael Daniel, Brigitte Pakendorf. 2018. Discovering dialectal differences based on oral corpora. // Kompjuternaja lingvistika i intellektualnyje tekhnologiji. Proceedings of International conference Dialogue. Issue 17 (24). P. 28-38.
Arkhipov, Alexandre, Michael Daniel, Oleg Belyaev, George Moroz, John H. Esling. 2019. A reinterpretation of lower-vocal-tract articulations in Caucasian languages, in: Proceedings of the 19th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Melbourne, Australia 2019. Australasian Speech Science and Technology Association Inc. P. 1550-1554.
Chechuro, Ilya, Michael Daniel and Samira Verhees. 2021. Small-scale multilingualism through the prism of lexical borrowing. International Journal of Bilingualism 25(4). P. 1019-1039.
Chechuro, Ilya, Michael Daniel and Samira Verhees. 2021. Small-scale multilingualism through the prism of lexical borrowing. International Journal of Bilingualism 25(4). P. 1019-1039. 
Chechuro I., Daniel M., and Verhees S. 2019. Daghestanian loans. Linguistic Convergence Laboratory, HSE. .)
Comrie, Bernard, and Maria Polinsky. 1998. The great Daghestanian case hoax. In: Anna Siewierska and Jae Jung Song (eds.), Case, typology and grammar. John Benjamins Publishing Company. 95-114.
 Daniel, M., K. Filatov, T. Maisak, G. Moroz, T. Mukhin, C. Naccarato, and S. Verhees. 2022. Typological Atlas of the Languages of Daghestan (TALD), v. 1.0.0. Moscow: Linguistic Convergence Laboratory, NRU HSE. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6807070. http://lingconlab.ru/dagatlas.
Daniel, Michael, and Andrew Spencer. 2009. The Vocative: an outlier case. In: Andrej Malchukov and Andrew Spencer (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Case. NY: Oxford University Press.
Daniel, Michael, and Dmitry Ganenkov. 2009. Case marking in Daghestanian: limits of elaboration. In: Andrej Malchukov and Andrew Spencer (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Case, 668-685. NY: Oxford University Press.
Daniel, Michael, and Edith Moravcsik. 2005 (2013). Associative plurals. In: Matthew Dryer, Martin Haspelmath, Bernard Comrie and David Gil (eds.) World Atlas of Language Structures. Oxford University Press.
Daniel, Michael, and Nina Dobrushina. (Under revision, a) Apprehensive in East Caucasian. Submitted to a collected volume to appear in Language Science Press. 
Daniel, Michael, Ilya Chechuro, Samira Verhees, Nina Dobrushina. 2021. Lingua franca as lexical donors. Language 97(3). P. 520-560.
Daniel, Michael, Ilya Chechuro, Samira Verhees, Nina Dobrushina. 2021. Lingua franca as lexical donors. Language 97(3). P. 520-560. 
Daniel, Michael, Ilya Shurov, Alexei Koshevoy, and Nina Dobrushina. 2022. Can Recall Data Be Trusted? Evaluating Reliability of Interview Data on Traditional Multilingualism in Highland Daghestan. Field Methods 34(2). P. 288-302.
Daniel, Michael, Ruprecht von Waldenfels, Aleksandra Ter-Avanesova, Polina Kazakova, Ilya Schurov, Ekaterina Gerasimenko, Daria Ignatenko, Ekaterina Makhlina, Maria Tsfasman, Samira Verhees, Aleksei Vinyar, Vasilisa Zhigulskaya, Maria Ovsjannikova, Sergei Say, Nina Dobrushina. 2019. Dialect loss in the Russian North: modeling change across variables. Language Variation and Change. Vol. 31. No. 3. P. 353-376. 
Daniel, Michael, Timur Maisak, and Solmaz Merdanova. 2012. Causatives in Aghul. In: P. Suihkonen, B. Comrie, V. Solovyev (eds.) Argument structure and grammatical relations. A cross-linguistic typology. Issue 126. Philadelphia, Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. Pp. 55-113.
Daniel, Michael, Zarina Molochieva and Zaira Khalilova. 2010. Ditransitive constructions in East Caucasian. In: Bernard Comrie and Martin Haspelmath (eds.) Studies in Ditransitive construction: a comprehensive handbook. Berlin, NY : Walter de Gruyter. Pp. 277-315
Daniel, Michael. 2005. Understanding Inclusives. In: Elena Filimonova (ed.) Clusivity: typology and case studies of the inclusive-exclusive distinction. Amsterdam : John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Daniel, Michael. 2005 (2013). Plurality in independent personal pronouns. In: Matthew Dryer, Martin Haspelmath, Bernard Comrie and David Gil (eds.) World Atlas of Language Structures. Oxford University Press.
Daniel, Michael. 2014. Against the addressee of speech – Recipient metaphor: Evidence from East Caucasian. In: Silvia Luraghi and Heiko Narog (eds.) Perspectives on Semantic Roles. Typological studies in language 106. Philadelphia, Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. Pp. 205-239.
Daniel, Michael. 2014. The Second Genitive in Russian. In: Silvia Luraghi and Hannu Tommola (eds.) Partitive cases and related categories. Berlin, NY: Mouton de Gruyter. Pp. 347-377.
Daniel, Michael. 2015. Logophoric reference in Archi. Journal of Pragmatics. Vol. 88. P. 202-219. 
Daniel, Michael. 2015. Stem initial alternation in Russian third person pronouns: variation in grammar. In: Kompjuternaja lingvistika i intellektualnyje tekhnologiji. Proceedings of International conference Dialogue. Moscow: RGGU. Pp. 95-103.
Daniel, Michael. 2016. Book review: Sonnenhauser, Barbara and Patrizia Noel Aziz Hanna: Vocative! Addressing between system and performance // Folia Linguistica. 2016. Vol. 50. No. 2. Pp. 725-733.
Daniel, Michael. 2022. Double causatives, lability and elusive agent in Mehweb. STUF - Sprachtypologie und Universalienforschung. P. 73-97.
Daniel, Michael and Victoria Khurshudian. 2015. Valency Classes in Eastern Armenian. Bernard Comrie and Andrej Malchukov (eds.) Valency classes in the World’s languages. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Pp. 483-540.
Daniel, Mikhail, and Solmaz Merdanova. 2001. Conception of number in a language lacking deficient number paradigms. Aghul from within and from outside. Proceedings of the International Workshop Dialogue’2001 in Computational and Applied Linguistics. Moscow: Aksakovo, vol. 1. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail, and Yury Lander. 2013. Asymmetry of syntactic roles in relativization: data on relativization frequency in Archi and Udi // Semantika jazykovykh jedinic raznykh urovnej. Jezhegodnyj sbornik naychnykh trudov. Issue 15. Makhachkala: Daghestan State University. Pp. 59-78. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail. 1998. Constructions with ‘consumed’ reference. On one type of the use of the preposition s in Russian. Proceedings of the International Workshop Dialogue’1998 in Computational and Applied Linguistics. Kazan: Heter, vol. 1. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail. 1999. Semantic types of associative plurals. Data from Bagvalal. // Tipologija i kultura. From description to explanation. Moscow: Jazyki Russkoj Kultury. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail. 2001. Noun. Case and spatial forms. Predicate-argument relations. // Aleksandr Kibrik (ed.). Bagvalinskij jazyk. Grammatika. Teksty. Slovari. Moscow: IMLI RAN. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail. 2002b. Is inclusive a first person pronoun? A study in terminology in a typological perspective. // Vladimir Plungian and Anna Urmanchieva (eds.) Jazyki mira, tipologija, uralistika. Tribute to Tatiana Zhdanova. Articles and memories. Moscow: Indrik. Pp. 232-251. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail. 2007. Peripheral meanings of number in Tatar and some other Turkic languages // Misharskij dialekt tatarskogo jazyka. Ocherki po sintaksisu i semantike. Kazan: Magarif. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail. 2009. The new Russian vocative. A history of the truncated address in the corpus of written texts // In: Korpusnyje issledovanija po russkoj grammatike. Мoscow: Probel. [In Russian]
Daniel, Mikhail. 2018. Part-of-speech category of the property words in Archi. // Voprosy jazykoznanija. Vol.  4. P. 114-132. [In Russian]
Dobrushina, Nina, Michael Daniel, and Yuri Koryakov. 2020. Atlas of multilingualism in Daghestan: A case study in diachronic sociolinguistics. Languages of the Caucasus. Vol. 4. P. 1-37.
Dobrushina, Nina, Michael Daniel, and Yuri Koryakov. 2021. Languages and sociolinguistics of the Caucasus. In Maria Polinsky (ed.) Oxford Handbook of Languages of the Caucasus, 27-66. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dobrushina, Nina. 2013. How to study multilingualism of the past: Investigating traditional contact situations in Daghestan. Journal of sociolinguistics 17, no. 3. P. 376-393.
Dorian, Nancy. 2010. Investigating variation. The effects of social organization and social setting. Oxfrod: Oxford University Press
Epps, Patience. 2018. Contrasting linguistic ecologies: Indigenous and colonially mediated language contact in northwest Amazonia. Language & communication. 62 (2018). 156-169.
Haspelmath, Martin and Uri Tadmor (eds.) 2009. Loanwords in the world's languages: a comparative handbook. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Kibrik, Aleksandr. 1970. K tipologii prostranstvennyx značenij (na materiale padežnyx sistem dagestanskix jazykov). In: Jazyk i čelovek. Moscow: Izd-vo MGU. [In Russian]
Koile, Ezequiel, Ilya Chechuro, Michael Daniel and George Moroz. 2022. Geography and language divergence: The case of Andic languages. PlosOne 17(5).
Koptjevskaja-Tamm, Maria, and Bernhard Wälchli, 2001, “The Circum- Baltic Languages: An Areal-Typological Approach,” The Circum-Baltic Languages: Typology and Contact, vol. 2: Grammar and Typology (Studies in Language Companion Series), eds. Ö. Dahl and M. Koptjevskaja-Tamm, Amsterdam & Philadelphia, pp. 615–750. 
Kristine A. Hildebrandt, Carmen Jany and Wilson Silva (eds.). 2017. Documenting variation in endangered languages.
Levin, Beth and Malka Rappoport-Hovav. 2005. Argument realization. Cambridge: CUP. 
Magomedgadžieva, Patimat, and Michael Daniel. 2021. A Dictionary of Tukita. http://lingconlab.ru/TukitaDict/
Michael A. Daniel, Nina Dobrushina and Dmitri Ganenkov. 2019. Essays in grammar of Mehweb. Language Science Press.
Musaev, Anwar and Michael Daniel. 2021. A Dictionary of Mehweb. http://lingconlab.ru/MehwebDict/
Plungian, Vladimir and Mikhail Daniel. 1996. Obligatoriness and contextual redundancy. Investigating the periphery of grammar. Izvestija RAN, SLJa, 55-1. Pp. 61-66.
Primus, Beatrice. 2011. Case-marking typology. In Jae Jung Song (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Linguistic Typology. Pp. 303-321. 
Seržant, Ilja A. 2015. The independent partitive as an Eastern Circum-Baltic isogloss. Journal of Language Contact 8.2: 341-418.
Shiryaev, Alexander, Michael Daniel, and George Moroz. 2022. Glottalized lateral in Rikvani Andi: an acoustic study. Phonetica 79:4, 353-395.
Stanford, James N., and Dennis Preston. 2008. Variation in Indigenous Minority Languages. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ter-Avanesova, Alexandra, and Michael Daniel. 2022 (online first). The Second Genitive in the history of Russian and across its dialects. Linguistic Variation. 
Vaughan, J. 2019. The ordinariness of translinguistics in Indigenous Australia. Translinguistics: Negotiating innovation and ordinariness, ed. by J. W. Lee, and S. Dovchin. London: Routledge. 90–103.
Volkov, Oleg, and Michael Daniel (published as an HSE preprint). Imperative paradigm in Chukotko-Kamchatkan languages is not formally homogeneous / NRU HSE. Series WP BRP "Linguistics". 2017. No. 63.
Volkov, Oleg, Mikhail Daniel, Maria Pupynina and Daria Ryzhova. 2012. Towards a description of the aspectual system of Chukotkan languages // Vladimir A. Plungian, Evgenij A. Golovko, Michael Daniel, and Ksenia Semenova. Acta linguistica Petropolitana. Issue 6. Typology of aspectual systems and categories. Vol. VIII.2. Publications of the Institute of Linguistic Studies. St. Petersburg: Nauka. Pp. 396-457. [In Russian]


